fastd v15
=========

New features
~~~~~~~~~~~~
* New message authentication code UMAC

  The new message authentication code UMAC provides very high security with much higher performance
  than the old GMAC methods. "salsa2012+umac" and "null+salsa2012+umac" are the new recommended
  methods for authenticated encryption and authenticated-only operation.

* Status socket

  A unix socket can be configured with the new *status socket* option. fastd will dump
  its current state as JSON on every connection on this socket; this status output is much more
  detailed than the old SIGUSR1 output. SIGUSR1 is ignored now.

  To compile fastd with status socket support, libjson-c is required.
  An example script to get the status can be found at ``doc/examples/status.pl``.

* MacOS X support

  fastd should now also run on recent versions of MacOS X. The inofficial
  TUN/TAP driver is required for this.

* New Sphinx-based documentation

* Fix warnings with CMake 3.0

Bugfixes
~~~~~~~~
* Signal handling improvements

  This should fix an issue where asynchronous handler scripts would be left as zombie processes occasionally.

* Config check fixes in TUN mode

  For some configuration mistakes, fastd would segfault instead of printing an error message.

Other changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
* Nicer error messages for common configuration mismatches like having no common methods

* When no port is given in a *bind* directive, a new random port will be chosen now for every
  new connection attempt (like it was already done when no bind address was configured at all)

  This allows setting additional bind options like interface binds without setting a static port.

* The peer hashtable is now grown dynamically to reduce memory usage for small numbers of peers
  and improve performance for huge numbers of peers

* Major refactoring: the internal peer and peer config structs have been merged

* Internally, int64 timestamps in milliseconds are now used always instead of struct timespec

  Milliseconds resolution and int64 range is completely sufficient, and many parts of the code
  have become simpler due to this change.
